.TH CORTEX 1 "July 2026" "cortex 0.3.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
cortex \- run Linux/DevOps changes transactionally, verify them, undo them with proof
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cortex
.RI [ GLOBAL\-FLAGS ]
.I COMMAND
.RI [ ARGS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cortex
runs a change for real inside an OverlayFS sandbox, proves it worked, and
only then merges it into the filesystem \(em recording an inverse
.B and a post-condition that proves the inverse worked
before it commits. Undo runs that inverse and then checks; drift detection
refuses to overwrite anything someone else changed since.
.PP
The planner is offline and deterministic: keyword matching over a registry of
human-written templates, with typed parameter extraction and bounded typo
tolerance. No model, no network. The same sentence always produces the same
plan, and every plan is shown in full before anything executes.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.BI "cortex try \(dq" "what you want" "\(dq"
Plan it, run it in a sandbox, verify, commit. The
.B try
verb is optional:
.B cortex run nginx on port 8080
works. Conjunctions compose:
\(dqinstall htop and open port 8080\(dq plans and runs both steps in order,
each journaled separately.
.TP
.BI "cortex do " "template key=value ..."
Run a known-good template directly, with exact parameters.
.TP
.B cortex status
What is applied, what is undoable, what is blocked by drift.
.TP
.BI "cortex undo " "[id|last|name]"
Reverse the newest pending change, or one named by journal id, template id
(\fBcortex undo nginx.serve\fR), service or container name
(\fBcortex undo cortex-nginx\fR). With
.B --all
reverses every pending change, newest first. With
.B --force
proceeds despite drift, rescuing the current contents first.
.TP
.BI "cortex receipt " [id]
A signed, human-readable summary of one transaction, drift marked.
.TP
.B cortex history
Everything cortex has committed, newest first.
.TP
.BI "cortex forget " id
Drop an entry from the pending list without undoing it (for irreversible
operations reversed by hand). The entry stays in the journal for audit.
.TP
.B cortex verify --self
The conformance suite: for every exercisable template, run it, prove it
worked, undo it, prove it undid. Skipped templates are listed with reasons.
.TP
.B cortex templates
List every reversible operation, grouped by category.
.TP
.BI "cortex templates show " id
One template's full contract: parameters, commands, undo, drift behaviour.
.TP
.BI "cortex templates search " words...
Find the template for a job by approximate words.
.TP
.B cortex demo
Prove the guarantee in about two seconds \(em no root, no docker, no network.
.SH GLOBAL FLAGS
.TP
.B --plan, --dry-run
Show the full plan \(em commands, undo, proofs \(em and stop.
.TP
.B --all
undo: reverse every pending change, newest first.
.TP
.B --force
undo: proceed despite drift (rescues current contents first).
.TP
.B --yes-irreversible
try/do: consent to an operation that cannot be undone.
.TP
.B --json
Machine-readable output.
.TP
.B --no-color
Never emit ANSI colour.
.TP
.BI "--journal-dir " dir
Where undo records live (default /var/lib/cortex/journal).
.TP
.BI "--lower " dir
Overlay base layer (default /).
.TP
.BI "--state-dir " dir
Overlay scratch (default /var/lib/cortex/transactions).
.TP
.BI "--policy " file
Policy file (default /etc/cortex/policy.toml). Must be root-owned when
cortex runs as root.
.SH USER TEMPLATES
Operator-written templates live in
.I ~/.cortex/templates/*.toml
(override with CORTEX_TEMPLATE_DIR). They pass the same well-formedness gate
as built-ins \(em an inverse without a post-condition is refused \(em and the
same policy engine. When cortex runs as root, template files must be
root-owned and not group/world-writable.
.SH POLICY
Every mutating operation is evaluated deny-by-default against a root-owned
.IR /etc/cortex/policy.toml .
When no file exists, the built-in policy applies: reversible operations run,
irreversible ones need explicit consent. Rules match templates (down to
argument globs) and workflows.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
cortex run nginx on port 8080
cortex deploy myapp image=nginx ports=8080:80 env=NODE_ENV=production volume=/srv/data:/data
cortex try "create user deploy with sudo" --plan
cortex try "install htop and open port 8080"
cortex do docker.run name=web image=nginx ports=8080:80
cortex undo cortex-nginx
cortex undo --all
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
0 on success; 1 when a plan is refused, verification fails, or an undo is
blocked (the message names the next step).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lib/cortex/journal
Undo records: inverse layers, compensations, fingerprints.
.TP
.I /etc/cortex/policy.toml
Root-owned authorization rules.
.TP
.I ~/.cortex/templates/
Operator-written templates.
.SH SEE ALSO
Project documentation:
.I https://github.com/iPatan7/Aix-Cortex-v1
